Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's start.
It's ten past.
NOTE CONF
Um, so as usual, I'm going to start with some
music.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but I want to explain first.
So, um, there is a textbook, uh, which I don't
NOTE CONF
particularly recommend.
It's called The Land of Lisp.
NOTE CONF
Um, the only reason I mention it is because it
comes with a music video, and I'm jealous because my
NOTE CONF
textbook doesn't have a music video, so I thought I'd
play this one.
NOTE CONF
And, um, it has words that are relevant to functional
programming in general, not just Lisp.
NOTE CONF
So look at the words when it's playing.
And I'll also mention that, um, Lisp is famous for
NOTE CONF
having lots of parentheses because it doesn't really have a
syntax.
NOTE CONF
It's just a bunch of it's, it's well, there's, there's,
uh, syntax, uh, in between a bunch of parentheses.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So there's no structured syntax in that sense.
NOTE CONF
So you'll see stuff about parentheses that's not relevant to
Haskell.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, let me just, uh, get this thing, uh,
get this thing going.
NOTE CONF
You can watch it.
Um, a couple of students did a wrap video for
NOTE CONF
this course many years ago by sampling Julian and my
lectures, and, um, but it wasn't, um, very musical, so
NOTE CONF
I won't play that.
One day I got for this job, so I learned
NOTE CONF
a little lisp, and what I found was just surprised.
It is a language so unique.
NOTE CONF
And so expressive.
So the coding never looks the same in my eyes.
NOTE CONF
Now I use parentheses for breakfast.
And if my program isn't done, I eat parentheses for
NOTE CONF
lunch and I They might.
Look funny, but.
NOTE CONF
They have Samantha Power that gives your programs thoughts of
brevity and puns.
NOTE CONF
So for those who want to keep in mind that
you can dance if you want.
NOTE CONF
No, honestly, I just keep.
Track of the robot's.
NOTE CONF
Evolution.
In the student force.
NOTE CONF
Everything to be an object.
You just tried a bunch of functions.
NOTE CONF
Higher order is preferred.
That way you can combine your code in richer ways.
NOTE CONF
Because the lack of state will always be ensured.
Super fun can keep your mind.
NOTE CONF
More simple.
So clever.
NOTE CONF
You.
One two, three, four.
NOTE CONF
I think that's a good place to stop.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Guitar solo.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So simple but refined.
Guaranteed to blow your mind.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's, uh, also applies to Haskell.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So today I'm going to be talking about talking about
algebraic data types.
NOTE CONF
And this is the most important part of functional programming
that I haven't already talked about.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, uh, worth paying attention.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, uh, who is, uh, worried because of the
scary word algebraic, which sounds like it's hard, you know,
NOTE CONF
mathematics stuff.
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Nobody.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well, good.
Um, usually students worry.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, it's just a word.
NOTE CONF
Um Uh, so don't worry about it in case you
are worried.
NOTE CONF
And, um, uh, there are actually, um, in fact, that
there are reasons for this word which are, uh, deep
NOTE CONF
in mathematics, but it's kind of mathematics at PhD level,
uh, that you don't have to worry about for this
NOTE CONF
course.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's some other things in Haskell that that are also
have deep mathematical roots that you don't have to worry
NOTE CONF
about in this course.
Um, anyway, um, uh, this this, um.
NOTE CONF
Uh, yeah.
These, these algebraic data types, they are now in all
NOTE CONF
functional programming languages.
Um, they're actually first developed here in Edinburgh by my
NOTE CONF
PhD supervisor in the 1970s, um, whose name was Rod
Birstall, who's now almost 90 and long retired.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So lots of stuff in functional programming actually comes from
NOTE CONF
Scotland.
But, um, that's not why we teach it here.
NOTE CONF
It's it's, um, you know, it's it's worldwide now.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
So types are very important in functional programming.
I've made that point, uh, dozens of times by now,
NOTE CONF
and we've seen lots of types already.
And these were all built in types in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So, you know, integers and characters and tuples and booleans
and floats and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then ways of building up, uh, types from other
NOTE CONF
types.
So lists functions.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Tuples I mentioned.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and and using these you can build up an
NOTE CONF
infinite number of types.
So you've got, you know apart from integers and booleans,
NOTE CONF
you've got lists of integers, lists of booleans, lists of
lists of booleans, pairs consisting of lists of lists of
NOTE CONF
lists of functions between integers and booleans and etc., etc..
Lots, lots of lots of lots of types.
NOTE CONF
Um, and but they're all built in a fixed number
of ways.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And now what I'm going to show you is how
NOTE CONF
to build new types in an infinite number of ways.
Um, and, and on on the way, I'll explain where
NOTE CONF
most of these other types come from.
Um, originally.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, I'll be doing this via a sequence of
NOTE CONF
examples.
And some of the examples are types you've seen already.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to explain how you could have defined them
if they weren't defined already.
NOTE CONF
So booleans is my first example.
And uh lists uh come uh example number four.
NOTE CONF
Um this is actually ten lines that define ten new
data types, you know, um, uh, pairs here.
NOTE CONF
This is um, uh, this is uh, um, tuples, you
know, two tuples.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
So I'm going to be showing you they're going to
NOTE CONF
get more and more complicated as I go by.
Um, none of them are very complicated.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, I'm going to start with really simple examples.
And so you see the features coming in one at
NOTE CONF
a time.
So starting with booleans.
NOTE CONF
So you know what booleans are truth values.
Where do they come from.
NOTE CONF
How would you get them if they weren't already there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Well here's how you'd get them.
Um.
NOTE CONF
All of the examples that I show in lectures, or
at least most of the examples I show in lectures,
NOTE CONF
are available from the course learn page.
Um, if you kind of click on code next to
NOTE CONF
where you can click on the lecture notes.
And so these examples you can play with, you can
NOTE CONF
download them and play with and and um for that
reason there's some stuff here that's um let me see.
NOTE CONF
Is this going to work.
Wait a second.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
My highlighting.
NOTE CONF
Um, yeah.
Uh, there's some stuff here at the beginning.
NOTE CONF
It's not working.
Okay, the first two lines here.
NOTE CONF
Forget about those.
Those are only, uh, only in the code that you
NOTE CONF
can download, because we're going to be defining stuff that's
already defined.
NOTE CONF
And if you try to run these definitions without hiding
the the existing definitions, it will just give you a
NOTE CONF
bunch of errors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, so for now, ignore these two lines.
If you want to play with the code here, you,
NOTE CONF
uh you need them to be there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The important thing here is, um, this line here beginning
with data.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This introduces a new type called bool.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Data means I'm introducing a new type.
NOTE CONF
A new data type.
Um, data type means it's a new type.
NOTE CONF
It's not related to any of the previous types or
that is it's not.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, it's a different type than all the previous ones.
It's called bool with a capital B, all types have
NOTE CONF
a capital letter at the beginning, and it's defined as
having two constructors.
NOTE CONF
Remember constructors um like nil and cons for lists okay
false and true are the constructors for booleans.
NOTE CONF
They're capital letters.
Um constructors always have capital letters.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so false.
And this is the reason why false and true in
NOTE CONF
Haskell are with, uh, capital letters.
By the way, don't know if you've noticed that that's
NOTE CONF
what what they are.
Okay, so so, um, uh, in abstract terms, we're defining
NOTE CONF
a new data type here, and we're giving a list
of its, some of its, of its values, which are
NOTE CONF
all constructors with a vertical bar in between them.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And you will have seen this.
I actually, um, in my first or second lecture, I
NOTE CONF
gave you this as a simple way of defining types,
and Julian has been using it in the Computation and
NOTE CONF
Logic lectures for defining the type of things that were,
you know, data thing equals a, b, c, d with
NOTE CONF
vertical bars in between them.
So that's a case.
NOTE CONF
That's a, that's an example of this, of this sort
of thing.
NOTE CONF
In that case there are five values with five.
Each of them had his name which is a capital
NOTE CONF
letter.
So here we've got two.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
And what this says is that um, is that the
NOTE CONF
values of bool are false and true.
It says that there are different.
NOTE CONF
So false and true are not the same.
They're they're not equal.
NOTE CONF
And it says that there aren't any other values of
type bool okay.
NOTE CONF
And those things together allow us to do um pattern
matching function definitions on booleans.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so here we have three examples of pattern matching
function definitions which take bool as a as an argument
NOTE CONF
okay.
So look at those in a second.
NOTE CONF
Um before I get there I just want to say
there's a there's a line here after the data definition
NOTE CONF
which is optional.
Um, and what it does, I will explain in detail
NOTE CONF
in a later lecture.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
For now I'll just say this is kind of a
magic incantation that you can put after your data type
NOTE CONF
definitions, um, to automatically give you, um, equality, an equality
function and a function that allows you to print out
NOTE CONF
the values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Called a show function.
Um, so it automatically provides those with without.
NOTE CONF
You have to do anything apart from recite this magical
incantation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so as I said, I'll explain what's going on
NOTE CONF
there in a later lecture.
For now, just take my word for it.
NOTE CONF
That's what it does.
Um, right.
NOTE CONF
And so now pattern matching function definitions, we've got two
two values of type bool.
NOTE CONF
And so if I wanted to find, for example a
function called nought which is logical negation, I just have
NOTE CONF
to give two cases the case for false and the
case for true.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, logical um conjunction which is built in these are
NOTE CONF
all built in-house into Haskell.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you don't have to define them.
But if you wanted to this would be how you
NOTE CONF
could do it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Logical conjunction.
Uh, I've defined it here using two cases.
NOTE CONF
Um, on the first argument.
So false in anything is false and true in anything.
NOTE CONF
Is the anything okay.
You know these definitions already from computation and logic.
NOTE CONF
Um, and disjunction.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So those are examples of functions defined using pattern matching
case analysis on this type that I've just defined.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And as I said the way I define this is
NOTE CONF
what makes it possible to write these definitions in that
style.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you used to writing these sorts of definitions.
NOTE CONF
The difference here is just that we've defined the function.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
We've defined the type right there instead of it being
a type that you're provided.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I said that you get automatically because of this magical
incantation here functions for equality and for printing out, um,
NOTE CONF
data values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, if you didn't get them Automatically, then they you
could define them like this.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, you know, this is a function that computes
equality.
NOTE CONF
And this is a function that converts, um, values of
bool to string, which is what, which is what I
NOTE CONF
mean by being able to print out values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
You need to have a string representation so that they
can appear on your, on your, you know, screen when
NOTE CONF
you're, um, when you're using them when you ask to
print them out.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But these definitions are provided for you.
NOTE CONF
Um, automatically this one is incorporated into the, into you
know, you've got a double equals function for testing equality.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You know about that.
NOTE CONF
You've used it okay.
So this definition is incorporated in the double equals function.
NOTE CONF
So when you try to do double equals on bool
it will use um essentially this function I mean as
NOTE CONF
if it was defined like that.
And if you try to print out something at the
NOTE CONF
keyboard and by by that what I mean is you
you, um, write an expression which has type bool.
NOTE CONF
It will, um, it will need to know what the
string representation of the result of that is.
NOTE CONF
And that's and that's what's happening here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This is converting from bool to string.
It kind of looks like it's saying nothing.
NOTE CONF
But the thing on the left hand side is a
bool.
NOTE CONF
So it's a value of this type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One of these two values.
And the thing on the right is a string.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um I've chosen to use a string which is
NOTE CONF
the same spelling as the as these values as these
constructors.
NOTE CONF
But it could be anything.
Um, so when you use the automatically generated one, it's
NOTE CONF
the actual names of the constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that relatively clear?
If this is a very simple example, I'm going to
NOTE CONF
go on to more complicated ones.
So if you have any questions about that, please ask.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Moving on to the next example.
NOTE CONF
This example is, um.
Seasons.
NOTE CONF
Winter, spring, summer and fall.
Not salt and pepper.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is twice as complicated as the previous
example because we've got four values rather than two.
NOTE CONF
Um, so we've got a type, a new type called
Season Capital S, because it's a type and it's got
NOTE CONF
four values.
There they are winter, spring, summer and fall.
NOTE CONF
Capital letters at the beginning.
And I have this magic incantation saying, I want to
NOTE CONF
be able to do equality and print out values of
this function of this type if I need to.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, you know, so apart from the fact that
NOTE CONF
there's four values here, this is exactly the same kind
of thing as with booleans, Right.
NOTE CONF
We've got we've got four values.
Each of them has a constructor.
NOTE CONF
Um naming it um, they're all different.
So they're all not equal to each other.
NOTE CONF
Um, and there are no other values than these four
of this type which allows us to do pattern matching
NOTE CONF
function definitions.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So in this case we've got four values.
So we will generally um I mean doesn't have to
NOTE CONF
be but we, we will sometimes have four cases like
we have here okay.
NOTE CONF
So if we want to compute, if we want to
take a season and say what the next season is,
NOTE CONF
you know, in sequence, okay, the next season after winter
is spring and the next after spring is summer and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's what this function definition gives.
So, um, I hope you would have been able to
NOTE CONF
write that Yourself or other functions on season.
I mean, if I just tell you that you can
NOTE CONF
do it by cases, right?
So, for example, um, if you want to write a
NOTE CONF
function called is warm and it goes from season to
boolean, you could define it by cases saying winter is
NOTE CONF
warm of winter equals false is warm of spring.
Well, you can define decide what your answers are to
NOTE CONF
these things.
And it depends on whether you're in Scotland or in
NOTE CONF
a country with warm seasons or not.
But um, anyway, for each of these, each of these
NOTE CONF
seasons, you can give whether it's warm or not by
cases.
NOTE CONF
That was a joke and nobody laughed.
I'm very disappointed.
NOTE CONF
Not a very good joke, anyway.
Here's here's what the equality function would give you if
NOTE CONF
you didn't have it built in.
And it is built in because of this magic.
NOTE CONF
These magic words here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Equality.
It's not.
NOTE CONF
I mean, it requires, uh, requires five cases because you
need the case where they're equal, which are these first
NOTE CONF
four, and then all the other cases are covered by
the the last one here.
NOTE CONF
And, um, here's a function for converting seasons to strings.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Right.
By the way, I should have said, um.
NOTE CONF
Data.
And then a type.
NOTE CONF
Whatever.
Uh, this is defining a new type.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Which is different from.
NOTE CONF
When I introduce a type like this.
You know the type of predicates on a.
NOTE CONF
Maybe I'll just fill this in.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This is defining a new type with constructors.
NOTE CONF
This is giving an abbreviation for an existing type.
This is a type you already had for for each
NOTE CONF
for each a you know for each type A this
is a type.
NOTE CONF
You already have the functions from A to bool and
you're just giving it a name.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So these are not the same.
NOTE CONF
And this is why we use type here and data
there different different.
NOTE CONF
Keywords.
To introduce them.
NOTE CONF
Um right.
Clear.
NOTE CONF
Um Okay.
You can define functions, um, which convert, uh, seasons integers
NOTE CONF
and back.
And here's a way you might do that.
NOTE CONF
I'm just.
These are just examples that I'm, you know, simple examples
NOTE CONF
to show you how you can do things with these
new data types.
NOTE CONF
So here's a function converting seasons to integers.
So winter is zero and spring converts to one and
NOTE CONF
so forth here and the other direction from integer to
season.
NOTE CONF
We can do that by case analysis okay I've defined
this in such a way that these are inverse to
NOTE CONF
each other.
But they're just they're just functions.
NOTE CONF
I've decided to define um.
One thing to point out at this point is that
NOTE CONF
is that, um, seasons are not this is not saying
seasons are represented by integers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, seasons are not represented by anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
There's represented they're represented.
NOTE CONF
That is to say they're represented by the constructors okay.
There is nothing when you're competing with seasons other than
NOTE CONF
the constructors for the values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the fact that I've defined this function to, to
give some numerical values corresponding to the seasons doesn't mean
NOTE CONF
that the seasons are represented by numbers in the computer,
okay?
NOTE CONF
They're represented by, um, these constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
This is in contrast to, uh, some conventional programming language
NOTE CONF
where, for example, false and true are represented by one
and zero or by or by any non-zero value and
NOTE CONF
zero or something.
There is no representation of these types.
NOTE CONF
Other than in terms of the constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Of course, you know, that's sort of a lie because
of course, inside the computer there will be a representation
NOTE CONF
of these things in terms of, of bits.
Um, and it will be chosen to be efficient somehow.
NOTE CONF
But that's entirely invisible to you as far as you
can, as far as you can tell, as far as
NOTE CONF
you can access.
The only things there are of this type are these
NOTE CONF
four constructors.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here are these.
Here's this, um, this way of converting back and forth,
NOTE CONF
um, from, from, uh, seasons to numbers.
And we can we can use that.
NOTE CONF
The reason I define this, or one reason I could
have defined this, is to make it easier to, to
NOTE CONF
define this function.
Next.
NOTE CONF
So here is another version of the next function called
next prime.
NOTE CONF
Um going from season to season.
And it computes the same thing as this function I
NOTE CONF
had a minute ago.
Okay, which gave me the next season, but it's done
NOTE CONF
using arithmetic.
So you convert the season to a number, you add
NOTE CONF
one to it, and then you take the the result
of that modulo four.
NOTE CONF
So remainder when divided by four.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In order to get that the the thing after fall
is winter.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because three sorry.
NOTE CONF
If you if you apply this to fall you get
three plus one is four.
NOTE CONF
Remainder when divided by four is zero.
Um convert that back to a season is winter.
NOTE CONF
Oh, sorry.
Here.
NOTE CONF
Winter.
Okay, so this would just be an alternative way to
NOTE CONF
define that next function using arithmetic.
I think you've seen this function mod before.
NOTE CONF
Um, if not it means modulo or Remainder.
Integer division.
NOTE CONF
Remainder.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you wanted to define equality, you could do
it in terms of these numerical, numerical, um, uh, values
NOTE CONF
for seasons.
Um, because this because this conversion here is um, 1
NOTE CONF
to 1 injective okay.
For every season there's a different number.
NOTE CONF
You can check equality of seasons by converting them to
to to integers.
NOTE CONF
And then comparing the integers.
So this is equality using equality on integers to get
NOTE CONF
equality on seasons.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Clear.
Let's see what time it is okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is a little bit boring defining a type
NOTE CONF
by enumerating its values.
Um can we do anything else.
NOTE CONF
Yes of course.
Otherwise I wouldn't ask that question.
NOTE CONF
So, um, uh, here is an example of, um, shapes.
Uh, you could imagine these being the, you know, a
NOTE CONF
data type that you might use if you wanted to
build, um, some sort of, um, graphical system that has
NOTE CONF
different kinds of shapes in it.
And in this case, I'm only going to be talking
NOTE CONF
about two kinds of shapes, um, circles and rectangles.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Of course, you could have lots of other, um, kinds
of shapes, but I'll just stick with those two for
NOTE CONF
this, for this example.
Um, what this is showing.
NOTE CONF
So let's first focus on these two lines here okay
I'm defining a type shape capital S.
NOTE CONF
And it has two cases uh separated by vertical bar
okay.
NOTE CONF
This is like a minute ago I had four cases
represented by vertical bars.
NOTE CONF
Here I have two cases, um, separated by vertical bars.
Um, these two cases are more complicated than than for
NOTE CONF
bool and season because these constructors take values.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we have a circle with a radius.
Circle is a constructor.
NOTE CONF
Radius is the type.
The the type of the value that circle applies to.
NOTE CONF
I'll explain that in a second.
A bit more.
NOTE CONF
Rect is a constructor and it takes a width and
a height.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
What our radius width and height.
NOTE CONF
These are just in the first three lines.
I've just defined these as synonyms for float.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um so I can do that.
NOTE CONF
They're just names for float.
And the only reason I've done that is, um, to,
NOTE CONF
um, make it a little bit clearer what it is
that these things represent.
NOTE CONF
These are just these are just names, okay?
They have no, uh, you know, it would be exactly
NOTE CONF
the same for this example if I'd written float, float
and float in these three cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But I want to make my, my explanations a little
NOTE CONF
clearer.
So circle applies.
NOTE CONF
It takes a radius and rect.
Rectangle takes a width and a height okay.
NOTE CONF
Again magic magic incantation for equality and show.
So what do I get?
NOTE CONF
From this I get, um.
I get a new type shape and I get two
NOTE CONF
constructors circle and rect.
And circle has type.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay, radius.
Arrow shape.
NOTE CONF
You give it a radius and you get a shape.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's a circle applied to a radius.
Of course this is just another name for float.
NOTE CONF
That's the the function you get from this first line
here circle radius okay.
NOTE CONF
And the other the other constructor is called rect okay.
Capital letters because it's constructor.
NOTE CONF
And it takes.
A width and a height and gives you a.
NOTE CONF
Gives you a shape okay.
So it's constructor.
NOTE CONF
In this case unlike with bool and season it's a
function okay.
NOTE CONF
You've seen constructors that are function already like cons for
lists.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so you give it values to get the value
of the type that you've defined okay.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This one takes one argument.
NOTE CONF
This one takes two arguments.
And that's what the definition says.
NOTE CONF
This is just a this is just something you get
from this definition.
NOTE CONF
So circle.
This circle function or constructor comes from the first line.
NOTE CONF
The rect function comes from the second line.
Again these are constructors, which means that the only values
NOTE CONF
of shape that there are are the ones you can
produce with these two constructors.
NOTE CONF
And the results of applying these constructors to values give
you shapes that are that are different from each other.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, you know, so first of all, shape applied
NOTE CONF
to you know, radius one is different from sorry circle
apply to radius one is different from circle applied to
NOTE CONF
radius two okay.
And also circle apply to anything is different from rect
NOTE CONF
applied to anything Okay.
And this is what allows you to do pattern matching
NOTE CONF
function definitions again okay.
Because you can distinguish between circles and rectangles.
NOTE CONF
They're different.
And you can extract the value.
NOTE CONF
Uh that circle was applied to to get a shape
okay.
NOTE CONF
So you can extract the radius from a circle.
And you can extract the width and height from a
NOTE CONF
rectangle.
And so you can write definitions using those, all of
NOTE CONF
those things.
So here is for example uh the area of a
NOTE CONF
shape as a as a number okay.
And um, there's two cases because this the area of
NOTE CONF
a circle is um is is pi r squared.
If r is the radius okay.
NOTE CONF
Which is different from the area of a rectangle.
So if we want to compute area apply to shape.
NOTE CONF
If the case is circle with radius r, then the
answer is pi times r squared.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Pi is built in in Haskell by the way.
NOTE CONF
And if we want to find the area of a
shape which is a rectangle, the second case applies.
NOTE CONF
So we've got a rectangle.
It's got a width w and a height h.
NOTE CONF
And so of course the area of a rectangle with
with w height h is w times h.
NOTE CONF
So that's the answer there.
So these are you know two different cases two different
NOTE CONF
ways of computing the area.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is like you know since these are constructors
with arguments.
NOTE CONF
This is like the situation where you were defining functions
on lists where you had to distinguish between, you know,
NOTE CONF
the empty list and the list ex-cons, exes or something.
And you can extract the head and the tail by
NOTE CONF
pattern matching.
And here we're extracting the width and the height or
NOTE CONF
the radius using pattern matching.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this allows you to write these quite compact
definitions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is that clear?
NOTE CONF
Are there any questions?
Nobody's asking any questions.
NOTE CONF
You're either.
It's either so simple that you understand everything or it's,
NOTE CONF
uh, or you're just, um, kind of stunned and, uh.
You stunned?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Some people are stunned.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I'll carry on.
Anyway, um, uh, here is, uh, here's some code for,
NOTE CONF
uh, checking equality Equality of shapes and for converting shapes
into, um, into strings.
NOTE CONF
I won't kind of go through that.
It's a little bit more complicated just because we've got
NOTE CONF
the arguments for the for the, um, for the different
kinds of shapes and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
The result that you'll get from this, from this code
NOTE CONF
for converting shapes into strings will, um.
Will produce, um, strings that look like circle and then
NOTE CONF
a number or rect and then a number and another
number.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, the, the representation of these things, they're not
NOTE CONF
going to look, the representation of a circle is not
going to look like this.
NOTE CONF
It's going to look like circle of six or something.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, the thing that makes this a circle is not
that there's some kind of circular thing in the computer,
NOTE CONF
it's that they behave like circles.
Okay, so computing the area of a circle gives you
NOTE CONF
the right answer for a thing.
A circle with radius r.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, now, I just, I just said, you know, with
this definition here, you can write these nice pattern matching
NOTE CONF
function definitions.
It's only two lines to compute the area of, of
NOTE CONF
a shape.
And there's two cases.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, if you didn't have pattern matching function definitions, you
NOTE CONF
could define functions which, um, you know, apply to a
shape.
NOTE CONF
Tell you if it's a circle or not.
So these are predicates.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Is something a circle.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Circle.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Rectangle.
NOTE CONF
No.
Is it a rectangle you know, for a circle.
NOTE CONF
False.
For rectangle.
NOTE CONF
True.
What's the radius?
NOTE CONF
If it's a circle, it's the one.
you know, that you gave when you form the circle
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Width and height.
So these are functions.
NOTE CONF
These are called tests and selectors okay.
These are two tests for checking to see whether something's
NOTE CONF
a circle or a rectangle.
And these are functions for extracting the value that was
NOTE CONF
used to build the circle or the rectangle.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um so if you're not a Haskell programmer, you're
probably used to definitions like this one here for computing
NOTE CONF
the area.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we've got, you know, cascaded case analysis, uh, where
the cases are, you know, is it a circle or
NOTE CONF
not?
Is it a rectangle or not?
NOTE CONF
In case it's a circle, we need to extract the
radius and then compute the result.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
In case it's a rectangle we need to extract the
NOTE CONF
width and the height and compute the result.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Of course, these could be made a little bit shorter
by putting, you know, instead of w times h where
NOTE CONF
w and h are defined here we could say width
of s times h height of s.
NOTE CONF
But anyway you've got a bunch of code there.
And using these using these these functions.
NOTE CONF
And this is all done very compactly um using pattern
matching here.
NOTE CONF
This is why I'm a big fan of this style
of, um, of programming.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, and of course, you could write other functions.
NOTE CONF
The only one that I've given here is area.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And of course, in a real graphics package program and
using Haskell, you would have not just, you know, uh,
NOTE CONF
not just circles and rectangles, you'd have other shapes and
you'd also have positions for the, you know, they would
NOTE CONF
be in space somewhere and you move them around and
they change their positions.
NOTE CONF
Okay, but this is simplest possible definition for, uh.
For this I want to move on to lists.
NOTE CONF
So you've been using lists since like lecture two or
something.
NOTE CONF
Um, and so this is how you could get lists
if they weren't built in.
NOTE CONF
And this example, uh, brings in, um, a couple of,
uh, of things that you haven't seen yet with the
NOTE CONF
previous example.
So first of all, um, uh, this is a so-called
NOTE CONF
parameterised type, meaning that you have not just lists.
It's not just defining lists.
NOTE CONF
You're defining lists of a type, okay?
A is a type, you know, so you have lists
NOTE CONF
of integers or lists of booleans or lists of functions
from into bool or whatever it is.
NOTE CONF
So this is the the type of the items in
the list.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that type appears In the definition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So if we want to build lists of integers then
NOTE CONF
we need to um, you know, use integers.
And so the type integers will appear.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's arbitrary.
NOTE CONF
So.
So it's a that appears here for whatever type it
NOTE CONF
is you want to put in.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now this we know already it has two cases.
Oh sorry.
NOTE CONF
The other thing that's, that's that's not in the previous
examples is this is recursive.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So you've got you're defining lists and you the definition
NOTE CONF
involves lists.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So a recursive recursive parameterised type.
Um okay.
NOTE CONF
But the rest of it is familiar except for the
the notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because you know that a list has two to there
NOTE CONF
are two kinds of lists.
There's the empty list, and there's a list built using
NOTE CONF
cons from whoops.
From an item and a list.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is exactly the same thing as what
you used to, except that I'm using nil instead of
NOTE CONF
this sort of pair of square brackets.
And I'm using cons which takes two arguments and place
NOTE CONF
of um a colon.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So uh cons.
You give it an A and you give it a.
NOTE CONF
A list of a and it gives you a list
of a.
NOTE CONF
And so for example cons uh, three nil okay.
And what you're used to is um, you've got this
NOTE CONF
infix Function colon pronounced cons and it has type a
arrow.
NOTE CONF
List of a.
Arrow.
NOTE CONF
List of a.
And you'd write um three.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this is what you've been doing up until today.
NOTE CONF
All right.
If you'd if you didn't have lists, if you didn't
NOTE CONF
have lists in Haskell, and you introduce them using the
code there, then you'd be writing this to get the
NOTE CONF
same effect as what you've already had up until now,
using that other notation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's the same idea, different notation.
NOTE CONF
And you can define this yourself.
And the other ones are built in okay.
NOTE CONF
So two cases empty list and a non-empty list.
Um, and you can write the same sort of definitions
NOTE CONF
you've been writing up to now for lists you can
write in this kind of self-defined, um, list version here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So for example, this is the append function for taking
NOTE CONF
two lists and joining them together.
Sort of, you know, one list, another list joining them
NOTE CONF
in the middle.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And the definition is recursive, you know.
So this is a recursive data type.
NOTE CONF
And so a definition will typically involve recursion.
So this is exactly the same um definition as I
NOTE CONF
gave some number of lectures ago for this append function.
Append written using double plus okay.
NOTE CONF
Takes two lists joins them end to end.
So empty list append wise is equal to wise and
NOTE CONF
a list containing at least one element.
Okay, so cons x xz append ys okay.
NOTE CONF
Recursive call to get x is x is append ys
and then a cons x onto the front.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This this was written um in a previous lecture like
NOTE CONF
this.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So same thing, different notation.
Um, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Here's here's just examples.
The map function on these kinds of lists, um, and
NOTE CONF
the filter function on these kinds of lists.
Okay, definitions are exactly the same as they were in
NOTE CONF
a previous lecture, except for notation.
Same.
NOTE CONF
Same sort of, um, change.
Okay, so so this is exactly like Haskell except for
NOTE CONF
notation.
So we don't have we don't have square brackets here.
NOTE CONF
We don't have um, we don't have things like um.
We don't have things like, um, strings built in as
NOTE CONF
a, as an abbreviation for um, for lists of characters
with a special notation for writing them down.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You just have the, the, the idea of lists built
NOTE CONF
up using items starting from the empty list and the
ability to write functions on them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But that's the that's the main.
NOTE CONF
You also don't have list comprehension here okay.
These are just the values the the values for lists
NOTE CONF
okay.
Is that any questions about that.
NOTE CONF
That's the hardest example that I'm going to show you
today.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And I'm going to carry on with the next lecture
NOTE CONF
with more examples.
But I'm not finished yet.
NOTE CONF
Um, I wanted to show you finally natural numbers, which
I've already talked about in a previous lecture, how you
NOTE CONF
can define, you know, plus and times.
Um, I called it piano arithmetic, named after an Italian
NOTE CONF
mathematician called Giuseppe Piano from the, uh, 19th century.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And I gave these definitions of plus and times and
exponentiation.
NOTE CONF
And the idea was here that that numbers are represented
by zero and, um, and the what you get by
NOTE CONF
adding one to a number so you can, you can
have zero or you can add 1 to 0, or
NOTE CONF
you can add 1 to 0 twice and so forth.
You can get all the, all the natural numbers that
NOTE CONF
way.
And I'm saying here this is defining arithmetic by recursion.
NOTE CONF
And it's wrong okay.
It's not wrong Okay, it's not wrong, but it's not
NOTE CONF
as good as it could be.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
And the reason it's not as good as it could
be is because it says here that these functions work
NOTE CONF
on integers, but actually they only work on positive integers.
That is to say natural number zero.
NOTE CONF
And the numbers, um, that are greater than zero.
Um, so some of these okay, some of them will
NOTE CONF
give you a sensible answer if you use a negative
number on them, like, you know, minus three plus zero
NOTE CONF
will be minus three here.
But um, really, um, uh, they're for natural numbers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So doing this correctly, um, correctly, you know, really, um,
NOTE CONF
properly representing things, you would represent, um, natural numbers using
a data type.
NOTE CONF
And there are two cases, the case of zero with
a capital Z and the case of, um successor of
NOTE CONF
a number.
This is a recursive definition, successor of a natural numbers.
NOTE CONF
So successor is the one after it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Successor of zero is one, successor of one is two,
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And then the definitions that I showed you here, translating
NOTE CONF
it into this, um, into using these constructors, um, you
know, again, I'll just repeat zero is different from successor
NOTE CONF
of anything and all of the values of type that
are obtained using these constructors, allowing me to use pattern
NOTE CONF
matching function definitions.
And so I can write those definitions like that zero
NOTE CONF
plus n is equal to n successor of m plus
n is equal to the successor of m plus n,
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So recursive uh type definitions lead to recursive function definition.
So here's the recursion defining plus here.
NOTE CONF
In the second case, using plus and the argument M
here is smaller than the argument successor of M here
NOTE CONF
and so forth for these other cases.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you could do arithmetic this way.
Um, you know, uh, arithmetic on natural numbers this way.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so for example, um, what time is it?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
You know.
Successor of successor of zero.
NOTE CONF
Plus successor of successor of zero equals.
If you do this computation, the answer will be successor
NOTE CONF
of successor of successor of successor of zero.
Which is another way of writing.
NOTE CONF
Two plus two equals four.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And of course, this is not a sensible way of
doing arithmetic because imagine, you know, a number like a
NOTE CONF
million would be represented by successor a million times of
zero.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
You know, that would take up whatever way you represent
NOTE CONF
successor and zero would take up lots of storage in
the computer.
NOTE CONF
So of course, in Haskell you don't do this, um,
for real, for a number, for arithmetic.
NOTE CONF
Real arithmetic, you know, whether it's integers or whatever.
But it would be possible to do that.
NOTE CONF
And that's it for today.
So thanks for your attention.
NOTE CONF
Agnes.
There's a question there.
NOTE CONF
Any questions before I stop?
One minute.
NOTE CONF
Now.
You can come and ask afterwards if you have questions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thanks.
NOTE CONF
And we'll have more on this tomorrow.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So uh.
NOTE CONF
Really halfway.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's right.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um I'll just put this back in the charger.
No.
NOTE CONF
And uh.
Let me just let me.
NOTE CONF
Just call you.
Go.
NOTE CONF
Toe to toe.
Toe.
NOTE CONF
Where do you go?
Knock, knock.
NOTE CONF
Who's there?
No one.
NOTE CONF
Enough!
Quiet!
NOTE CONF
You're my mouth with extra gum.
Chew good.
NOTE CONF
When there's a port on a western bay.
And it serves a hundred ships.
NOTE CONF
A day.
Lonely sailors pass the time away and talk about their
NOTE CONF
homes.
And there's a girl in this harbour town, and she
NOTE CONF
works laying whisky down there.
Say, brandy, fetch another round.
NOTE CONF
She serves them.
Whisky and wine.
NOTE CONF
The sailors say brandy.
You're a fine girl.
NOTE CONF
What a good wife you would be.
Your eyes could steal a sailor from my sister.
NOTE CONF
Better than brandy.
Where's.
NOTE CONF